.TH MDNS-DNS-PROXY.TOML 5 "December 2025" "mdns-dns-proxy 0.1.0" "File Formats"
.SH NAME
mdns-dns-proxy.toml \- configuration file for mdns-dns-proxy
.SH SYNOPSIS
.I /etc/mdns-dns-proxy/config.toml
.br
.I ~/.config/mdns-dns-proxy/config.toml
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B mdns-dns-proxy.toml
file configures the behavior of the mdns-dns-proxy DNS server.
The file uses TOML format and is organized into sections.
All settings are optional and have sensible defaults.
.SH FILE FORMAT
.SS [server]
Server configuration section.
.TP
.B bind_address
IP address to bind the DNS server to.
.br
Type: string (IP address)
.br
Default: "127.0.0.1"
.br
Example: "0.0.0.0" (all interfaces)
.TP
.B port
Port to bind the DNS server to.
.br
Type: integer
.br
Default: 5335
.br
Note: Ports below 1024 require root privileges
.TP
.B tcp_timeout
TCP connection timeout in seconds.
.br
Type: integer
.br
Default: 30
.SS [cache]
Cache configuration section.
.TP
.B ttl_seconds
How long to cache mDNS query results in seconds.
.br
Type: integer
.br
Default: 120
.TP
.B enabled
Enable or disable result caching.
.br
Type: boolean
.br
Default: true
.SS [logging]
Logging configuration section.
.TP
.B level
Log level for the application.
.br
Type: string
.br
Options: "trace", "debug", "info", "warn", "error"
.br
Default: "info"
.SS [mdns]
mDNS query configuration section.
.TP
.B service_query_timeout_ms
Timeout for service discovery queries (PTR/SRV/TXT) in milliseconds.
.br
Type: integer
.br
Default: 1000
.TP
.B service_discovery_timeout_ms
Timeout for _services._dns-sd._udp.local. discovery in milliseconds.
.br
Type: integer
.br
Default: 2000
.TP
.B service_poll_interval_ms
Per-event poll timeout during service queries in milliseconds.
.br
Type: integer
.br
Default: 100
.TP
.B hostname_resolution_timeout_ms
Timeout for hostname resolution (A/AAAA) queries in milliseconds.
.br
Type: integer
.br
Default: 1000
.SH EXAMPLE
.nf
# mDNS-DNS Discovery Proxy Configuration

[server]
bind_address = "0.0.0.0"
port = 5335
tcp_timeout = 30

[cache]
ttl_seconds = 120
enabled = true

[logging]
level = "info"

[mdns]
service_query_timeout_ms = 1000
service_discovery_timeout_ms = 2000
service_poll_interval_ms = 100
hostname_resolution_timeout_ms = 1000
.fi
.SH PRIORITY
Configuration precedence (highest to lowest):
.IP 1. 4
Command-line arguments
.IP 2. 4
Environment variables
.IP 3. 4
Configuration file
.IP 4. 4
Built-in defaults
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/mdns-dns-proxy/config.toml
System-wide configuration file
.TP
.I ~/.config/mdns-dns-proxy/config.toml
User-specific configuration file
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR mdns-dns-proxy (1)
.SH AUTHOR
Written by jthoward64.
.SH BUGS
Report bugs at: https://github.com/jthoward64/mdns-dns-proxy/issues
